Dependencies and compilation
============================

Lambdapi requires a Unix-like system. It should work on Linux as well as
on MacOS. It might also be possible to make it work on Windows with
Cygwyn or with “bash on Windows”.

List of dependencies:

* GNU make
* OCaml (>= 4.04.1)
* Dune (>= 1.2.0)
* odoc (for documentation only)
* bindlib 5.0.0 (https://github.com/rlepigre/ocaml-bindlib)
* timed 1.0 (https://github.com/rlepigre/ocaml-timed)
* menhir
* pratter (>= 1.1)
* yojson (>= 1.6.0)
* cmdliner
* ppx_inline_test

Using Opam, a suitable OCaml environment can be setup as follows.

.. code:: bash

   opam switch 4.05.0
   eval `opam config env`
   opam install dune odoc menhir yojson cmdliner bindlib.5.0.0 timed.1.0 pratter ppx_inline_test

To compile Lambdapi, just run the command ``make`` in the source
directory. This produces the ``_build/install/default/bin/lambdapi``
binary, which can be run on files with the ``.dk`` or ``.lp`` extension
(use the ``--help`` option for more information).

.. code:: bash

   make               # Build lambdapi.
   make doc           # Build the documentation.
   make install       # Install the program.
   make install_vim   # Install vim support (optionally).

**Note:** you can run ``lambdapi`` with ``dune exec lambdapi``. The
``--`` dune flag is necessary when calling ``lambapi`` with flags. If it
is not given, flags are fed to the ``dune`` command instead.

The following commands can be used for cleaning up the repository:

.. code:: bash

   make clean     # Removes files generated by OCaml.
   make distclean # Same as clean, but also removes library checking files.
   make fullclean # Same as distclean, but also removes downloaded libraries.

Tests and supported libraries
=============================

You can run tests using the following commands.

.. code:: bash

   make tests        # Unit tests (not stopping on failure).
   make real_tests   # Unit tests (stopping on first failure).

   make dklib        # Checks files at https://github.com/rafoo/dklib/
   make focalide     # Checks files generated from the Focalize library
   make holide       # Checks files generated from the OpenTheory library
   make matita       # Checks the traduction of Matita's arithmetic library.
   make verine       # Checks files generated by the VeriT prover.
   make iprover      # Checks files generated by iProverModulo.
   make zenon_modulo # Checks files generated by ZenonModulo.

Profiling tools
===============

This document explains the use of standard profiling tools for the
development of ``lambdapi``.

Using Linux ``perf``
--------------------

The quickest way to obtain a per-symbol execution time is ``perf``. It
is simple to use, provided that you have the right privileges on your
machine. No change is required in the build procedure, but ``lambdapi``
must be invoked as follows.

.. code:: bash

   dune exec -- perf record lambdapi [LAMBDAPI_OPTIONS]

The program behaves as usual, but a trace is recorded in file
``perf.data``. The data can then be displayed with the following
command.

.. code:: bash

   perf report

Profiling using Gprof
---------------------

The ``gprof`` tool can be used to obtain a more precise (and thorough)
execution trace. However, it requires modifying the ``src/dune`` file by
replacing

::

   (executable
    (name lambdapi)

with the following.

::

   (executable
    (name lambdapi)
    (ocamlopt_flags (:standard -p))

This effectively adds the ``-p`` flag to every invocation of
``ocamlopt``.

After doing that, ``lambdapi`` can be launched on the desired example,
to record an execution trace. This has the (side-)effect of producing a
``gmon.out`` file. To retrieve the data, the following command can then
be used.

.. code:: bash

   gprof _build/install/default/lambdapi gmon.out > profile.txt

It takes two arguments: the path to the ``lambdapi`` binary used to
generate the profiling data, and the profiling data itself.
