Command line interface
======================

The main Lambdapi executable is called ``lambdapi``, and it can be
invoked using ``lambdapi COMMAND ...``. To see the list of the supported
commands, simply run ``lambdapi --help`` or ``lambdapi help``. To get
the documentation of a specific command run ``lambdapi COMMAND --help``.
It will contain the list of flags that are supported for the command.

The available commands are:

* ``help``: display the main help message.
* ``version``: give the current version of Lambdapi.
* ``check``: runs the main type-checking mode on input source files.
* ``init``: creates a new Lambdapi package. For more information have a look at
  the :doc:`getting_started` section.
* ``install``: installs the specified files according to package configuration.
* ``uninstall``: uninstalls the specified package.
* ``parse``: runs the parsing-only mode on input source files.
* ``beautify``: runs the parser and pretty-printer on input source files.
* ``lsp``: runs the Lambdapi LSP server.
* ``decision-tree``: compiles the decision tree of a symbol to a Dot graph and
  prints it to the standard output. Refer to :doc:`dtrees` for more
  information.

**Note:** the ``parse`` and ``beautify`` commands can trigger the
compilation of dependencies if the required object files (``.lpo``
extension) are not present.

**Note:** the commands that expect files are not limited to a single one.
The given files are all handled independently (in the order they are
given). The program immediately stops on the first failure, without
going to the next file (if any).

Input files
-----------

The commands ``check``, ``parse`` and ``beautify`` expect input files
with either the standard ``.lp`` extension, or the legacy (Dedukti)
``.dk`` extension. The appropriate parser is selected automatically.

**Note:** the ``beautify`` command outputs only *standard syntax*, and
hence it can be used to convert legacy syntax files (with the ``.dk``
extension) into the Lambdapi syntax.

Common flags
------------

The commands ``check``, ``parse``, ``beautify``, ``lsp`` and
``decision-tree`` all support the following command line arguments and
flags.

Configuration flags
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-c, --gen-obj  instructs ``lambdapi`` to generate object files for every
  checked module (including dependencies). Object files have the extension
  ``.lpo`` and they are automatically read back when necessary if they exist and
  are up to date (they are regenerated otherwise).

--verbose <NUM>  sets the verbosity level to the given natural number (the
  default value is 1). A value of 0 should not print anything, and the higher
  values (up to 3) print more and more information.

--lib-root <DIR>  sets the library root, that is, the folder corresponding to
  the entry point of the Lambdapi package system. This is the folder under which
  every package is installed, and a default value is only known if the program
  has been installed. In development mode, ``--lib-root lib`` must be given
  (assuming Lambdapi is run at the root of the repository).

--map-dir <MOD:DIR>  maps an arbitrary directory ``DIR`` under a module path
  ``MOD`` (relative to the root directory). This option is mainly useful during
  the development of a package (before it has been installed). However it can
  also be accessed using a package configuration file (``lambdapi.pkg``) at the
  root of the library’s source tree. More information on that is given in the
  section about the module system.

Debugging flags
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

--debug <FLAGS>  enables the debugging modes specified by every
  character of ``FLAGS``. Details on available character flags are obtained
  using ``--help``.

--timeout <NUM>  gives up type-checking after the given number of seconds.
  Note that the timeout is reset between each file, and that the parameter of
  the command is expected to be a natural number.

Confluence checking
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

--confluence <CMD>  check the confluence of the rewriting system by calling an
   external prover with the command ``CMD``. The given command receives
   `HRS`_ formatted text on its standard input, and is expected to output on the
   first line of its standard output either ``YES``, ``NO`` or ``MAYBE``.
   As an example, ``echo MAYBE`` is the simplest possible (valid) confluence
   checker that can be used.


For now, only the `CSI^ho`_ confluence checker has been tested with Lambdapi. It
can be called using the flag
``--confluence "path/to/csiho.sh --ext trs --stdin"``.

To inspect the ``.trs`` file generated by Lambdapi, one may use the
following dummy command:
``--confluence "cat > output.trs; echo MAYBE"``.

Termination checking
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

--termination <CMD>  check the termination of the rewriting system by calling an
  external prover with the command ``CMD``. The given command receives `XTC`_
  formatted text on its standard input, and is expected to output on the first
  line of its standard output either ``YES``, ``NO`` or ``MAYBE``.
  ``echo MAYBE`` is the simplest (valid) command for checking termination.

To the best of our knowledge, the only termination checker that is
compatible with all the features of Lambdapi is
`SizeChangeTool <https://github.com/Deducteam/SizeChangeTool>`__. It
can be called using the flag
``--termination "path/to/sct.native --no-color --stdin=xml"``

If no type-level rewriting is used
`Wanda <http://wandahot.sourceforge.net/>`_ can also be used.
However, it does not directly accept input on its standard input, so it
is tricky to have Lambdapi call it directly. Alternatively, one can
first generate a ``.xml`` file as described below.

To inspect the ``.xml`` file generated by Lambdapi, one may use the
following dummy command:
``--termination "cat > output.trs; echo MAYBE"``.

Specific flags for the “check” command
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

--too-long <FLOAT>  gives a warning for each interpreted source file command
   taking more than the given number of seconds to be checked. The parameter
   ``FLOAT`` is expected to be a floating point number.

--recompile  forces the compilation of the files given on the command line even
   if they have an up-to-date object file.

Specific flags for the “lsp” command
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

--standard-lsp  restricts to standard LSP protocol (no extension).

--lsp-log-file <FILE>  sets the log file for the LSP server. If not given, the
   file ``/tmp/lambdapi_lsp_log.txt`` is used.

Specific flags for the “install” and “uninstall” commands
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

--dry-run  prints the system commands that should be called instead of running
   them.

.. _HRS: http://project-coco.uibk.ac.at/problems/hrs.php
.. _CSI^ho: http://cl-informatik.uibk.ac.at/software/csi/ho/
.. _XTC: http://cl2-informatik.uibk.ac.at/mercurial.cgi/TPDB/raw-file/tip/xml/xtc.xsd
